Prepared by Organization / Role Signature
Katharina Immer ESO / TSI lead, OT-deputy SSS
(on behalf of the TSI team)
John Carpenter JAO / IST
Jongsuk Hong KASI / TPGS
Robert Kurowski ESO / ISAP lead
Ryan Loomis NRAO / PLWG Imaging lead
Luke Maud ESO / Commissioning Team
Hugo Messias JAO / P2G lead
Jennifer Donovan Meyer NRAO / ATAC
Paula Santos ESO / Obsprep ICT lead
Approved by Organization / Role Signature
Sergio Martin JAO / Head of DSO
Released by Organization / Role Signature
Alvaro Gonzales JAO / ALMA Deputy Director for Development
TSI Report:
Defining the proposal submission and project preparation
tools in the WSU era
ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Status: Released
September 23, 2025
2
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 3 of 53
Contents
1 Related Documents and Acronyms 5
1.1 1.2 1.3 Applicable documents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Reference documents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
List of Acronyms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
2 Charges 8
3 Executive Summary 8
4 Use Cases 10
4.1 Current Status . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4.1.1 Use Case A - Phase 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4.1.2 Use Case B - Phase 1 SB generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4.1.3 Use Case C - Phase 2 SB generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4.1.4 Use Case D - Phase 2 SB editing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4.1.5 Use Case E - Commissioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4.2 Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4.2.1 Requirements for the WSU-OT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4.2.2 Requirements for the SB Builder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
11
12
12
12
13
13
14
16
5 APDM 18
6 Spectral Setup 18
6.1 Current Status . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6.1.1 Basic description of the Phase 1 spectral setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6.2 ATAC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6.2.1 Overview of capabilities for users . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6.2.2 ATAC functionality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6.3 6.4 6.5 TPGS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . WSU Spectral Setup Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6.5.1 High level requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6.5.2 Capture of user science intent requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6.5.3 Correlator setup and visualization requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6.5.4 Updates for future milestone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
20
22
22
23
25
25
26
26
29
32
35
7 Deliverables 35
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 4 of 53
7.1 7.2 ALMA Internal and External Stakeholders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Further Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
39
8 Priorities and Timeline 41
8.1 8.2 8.3 WSU Timelines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Timeline for proposal and program tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Key Priorities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
43
44
9 Next Steps 45
A ATAC 46
A.1 Processing Flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A.2 Usable FS in the WSU signal chain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A.3 Spectral window setups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A.4 Frequency resolution, time resolution, and observing modes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
47
48
50
B TPGS 51
B.1 TPGS signal chain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 5 of 53
1 Related Documents and Acronyms
1.1 Applicable documents
No. Title Identifier
[AD1] ALMA System Technical Requirements ALMA-80.04.00.00-005-G-SPE
[AD2] The ALMA 2030 Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade ALMA Memo 621
1.2 Reference documents
No. Title Identifier
[RD1] ALMA Cycle 12 Technical Handbook Doc 12.3 v1 March 1, 2025
[RD2] ATAC Memo 23: ATAC simultaneous Imaging
Correlation and VLBI Beamforming improvement
for CCB-89 Sys-Req Version G review
Attached to
https://jira.alma.cl/browse/RID-
4852
[RD3] ATAC Memo 24: WSU Spectral Window
Properties Supported by the ATAC Configuration
Library
In Preparation
[RD4] Scientific Priorities for the First WSU Proposal
ALMA-05.00.00.00-3124-A-GEN
Call
[RD5] Transition to WSU Operations Working Group
Report
ALMA-05.15.00.00-3052-A-REP
[RD6] WSU APDM TSI Report ALMA-05.15.00.00-3012-A-REP
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 6 of 53
[RD7] WSU Assembly, Integration, Verification, and
Commissioning (AIVC) Working Group Report
ALMA-05.15.00.00-3016-3-REP
1.3 List of Acronyms
The acronyms used in this document are listed below.
ACA Atacama Compact Array
AD Applicable Document
AFSP ALMA Frequency Slice Processor
AIV Assembly, Integration, Verification
AIVC Assembly, Integration, Verification and Commissioning
ALMA Atacama Large Millimetre/submillimetre Array
APDM ALMA Project Data Model
ATAC Advanced Technology ALMA Correlator
BDF Binary Data File/Format
BLC ALMA Baseline Correlator
CDP (ATAC) Correlator Data Processor
CSV Commissioning and Science Verification
DSO Department of Science Operations
E2E End-to-End
EOC Extension and Optimization of Capabilities
FFX Frequency division / Fourier transform / Cross correlation
FS Frequency Slice
HA Hour Angle
GPU Graphics Processing Unit
ICT Integrated Computing Team
IDT Integrated Development Team
IF Intermediate Frequency
ISOpT Integrated Science Operations Team
LO Local Oscillator
LSB Lower Sideband
LST Local Sidereal Time
MDR Manual Data Reduction
ngOT ‘next-generation’ OT - the web-based version of the current OT
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 7 of 53
OSPFB Oversampled Polyphase Filter Bank
OSS Observing Script Simulator
OT Observing Tool
PDR Preliminary Design Review
PFB Polyphase Filter Bank
PHT Proposal Handling Team
PI Principle Investigator
P2G Phase-2 Group
QA Quality Assurance
RD Reference Document
RID Review Item Discrepancy
SB Scheduling Block
SCIREQ Science Requirements
SG Science Goal
SPW Spectral Window
SSR Science Software Requirements
SSS Sub-System Scientist
TP Total Power
TPGS Total Power Graphics processing unit Spectrometer
TSI Technical Solution Investigation
TWO Transition to WSU Operations
USB Upper Sideband
VLBI Very Long Baseline Interferometry
WG Working Group
WIFP Wideband IF Processor
WSU Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade
WSU-OT WSU version of the OT
WVR Water Vapour Radiometers
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 8 of 53
2 Charges
The charges defined by ISOpT and ICT for this TSI are1:
1. Identify the different use cases of the WSU-OT (e.g., Phase 1, batch mode, Commissioning,
Phase 2 SB Generation, Phase 2 tool used by the PIs to check the parameters at the SB level).
Define the scientific requirements and high-level design of the software employed in these use
cases in the WSU era.
2. Define the scientific requirements for the WSU spectral setup as will be offered to the users.
Such requirements shall guide the design of the spectral setup in the WSU-OT, including the
spectral visualizer. It is encouraged to consider how the foreseen changes will guide users to
make sensible choices when setting up their proposals (e.g. showing data rates and/or warnings
about long processing/delivery times). Such requirements should be considered as upstream,
while downstream data processing requirements are beyond the scope of this TSI.
3. Identify a list of deliverables for the design of the WSU-OT (e.g., calculation of LO solution,
parameters provided by ATAC, etc.) and identify a list of stakeholders who will deliver them.
4. Define a high-level priority list and timeline for the delivery of the different software men-
tioned in charge 1, considering the commissioning phases defined by the TWO-WG.
3 Executive Summary
The ALMA Observing Tool (OT) is the main interface for ALMA users and staff with which to
submit proposals and create observing Scheduling Blocks (SBs) to undertake science or testing and
commissioning observations alike. With the transition into the Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade (WSU)
era, ALMA will use significantly different correlators for the 12m and 7m ACA arrays (Advanced
Technology ALMA Correlator, ATAC), and in TP mode (Total Power GPU Spectrometer, TPGS),
that will require considerable updates for the observing tool(s) used in the WSU era.
From the discussion and investigations of this TSI, based upon the charges, it has been established
that the Use Cases (Section 4) will remain unchanged in practice, but should be captured in different
tools for each user group (scientific users vs ALMA staff). With the restructuring, a nomenclature
change would be adopted, moving away from a Phase 1 and Phase 2 definition to a “Proposal” and
“Program” scheme. Specifically, a single web-based tool is envisaged for the user facing “Proposal side”,
currently called the Phase 1 process. This will be the only interface seen by PIs, but will also be used
by ALMA staff to set up the Science Goals (SGs). This interface will effectively be the “WSU-OT”.
1These were reordered considering the flow of this document.
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 9 of 53
For all other processes that involve generating SBs, so-called Phase 2 (and current Phase 1 SB batch
generation), will be referred to as the “Program” side. There will be a separate web-based tool, the
“SB Builder”, where Proposal SGs are imported and generated into the GOUS/MOUS/SB structure2
-
only the parameters in this structure are displayed and editable at the tool interface. There will be no
replication or copying of SGs from the Proposal to the Program side as occurs with the current OT.
The SB Builder will be accessible only to ALMA staff, within which privileged staff will have editing
permissions.
The largest single change within the WSU-OT “Proposal” comes from a complete revamp required
for the front- and back-end of the Spectral Setup (see Section 6) node3 - the place where the user
selects the Spectral Windows (SPWs). PIs are currently presented with a limited selection of options
for the spectral setup subject to the current limitations of the Baseline Correlator (BLC). This picture
will drastically change in the WSU era due to the capabilities offered by ATAC and the TPGS. The
new correlators will enhance the level of freedom in the spectral setup of ALMA observations due to
a change in architecture. The process and concept of spectral setup definition will need to be adapted
to consider the usage of Frequency Slices (see Section 6.2 and Appendix A) when building SPWs.
It is therefore crucial to define the spectral capabilities that will be offered to PIs in the WSU
era and how these capabilities will be presented to the users during the proposal preparation. The
capabilitiesandtheirpresentationshouldallowuserstomaximizethescientificoutputoftheirproposals
while keeping the data rates and volumes within the limits set by operations during the transition to
WSU operations (see [RD5]).
Within the TSI we critically note that a new Visualization Facility is imperative to show the
complex spectral setup, given the new concept of Frequency Slices and the selection of SPWs within
the broader frequency coverage offered by the WSU. We also highlight that such a Visualizer should,
ideally, be made interactive and allow manual positioning and selection of the SPWs.
Moreover, the priority for the new Spectral Setup node shall be the shift to a more intelligent tool
that creates a SPW setup as defined by a User’s needs - based on their scientific requirements, and the
overall scientific context, without any manual intervention4. Specifically, with regard to the creation of
more intelligent software, we advocate for a three option approach whereby the WSU-OT will create
the SPWs based upon:
1. A pre-defined spectral setup based on extensive templates, including continuum coverage and
2This structure is well established and there are no plans to change this in the WSU era.
3Node being the nomenclature for the various setup selection items in the current OT, where a Proposal has a tree
and branch like structure that expands, and finally ends, in a node where a setup is editable.
4Meaning that a user does not specify the positions, widths, spectral resolution of each SPW by-hand.
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 10 of 53
spectral line cases for different scientific contextual cases.
2. User input of spectral lines, which are to be selected with a “line-picker”; the names of the lines
of interest and their expected line widths are minimum requirements.
3. Input of an interface file within which a user specifies the preferred center frequency, bandwidth
and spectral resolution of SPWs.
From whichever approach a User takes, the OT will create all spectral windows working within ATAC
and TPGS rules, and any other rules based on, e.g., data rates.
This document explains the use cases and the associated requirements in Section 4; describes the
ALMA Project Data Model in Section 5; summarizes the spectral setup, including the current design,
the ATAC and TPGS, the WSU spectral setup overview and the important requirements for the new
WSU spectral setup in Section 6; identifies the deliverables for the WSU-OT and SB builder designs
and who is responsible in Section 7; indicates the priorities and notional timeline in Section 8; while
finally indicating the next steps in Section 9. Technical details of ATAC and TPGS are more fully
described in two Appendices.
4 Use Cases
In the following section, we will first describe the current use cases of the OT and then discuss
possible new software as well as the corresponding requirements as user stories.
4.1 Current Status
ALMA Principal Investigators (PIs) must design their entire observation within the ALMA OT.
Their basis is to create a Proposal and define a science plan that is composed of one or more SGs.
The OT is the single interface for any user to interact with the observing setup. Two phases are
distinguished in the OT: Phase 1 - the proposal preparation and submission stage, and Phase 2 - the
generation of observatory-ready SBs5. PIs have editable access in Phase 1 for SG creation, but only
reading rights for the SB parameters in Phase 2. ALMA internal staff have (various) edit rights in
Phase 2 to flexibly implement changes (as required) into any observing setup.
Currently, the tool used for ALMA Operations is the classic OT – a Java-based desktop application
- while a new generation web-based observing tool, the ngOT, is being developed and is expected to
form the basis of what will be used in the WSU era. In this document, we refer to the observing tool(s)
needed for WSU specifically as the WSU-OT and the SB Builder.
5An SB is the minimum set of instructions describing an ALMA observation that can be fully calibrated.; [RD1],
Section 8.1
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 11 of 53
Many of the OT use cases will be affected by the WSU and might require significant optimizations.
Currently, allthesecapabilitiesareincludedinasinglesoftwaretool(i.e., theALMAOT)withseparate
functional tabs for ‘Proposal’ and ‘Program’ (i.e., Phase 1 and Phase 2), but the development of the
ngOT presents an opportunity to re-design and optimize the project preparation tools, especially in
anticipation of the upcoming shift to the WSU-OT that will need new features. A common back-end
code will likely be needed, but the front-end interfaces can in principle be different.
4.1.1 Use Case A - Phase 1
This is the proposal preparation and submission stage. The PI of a proposal is responsible for
filling out all necessary fields in the OT, confirming that it validates and then submitting the proposal
before the deadline.
The following description of features in the Phase 1 tool is non-exhaustive, but rather indicates a
generic workflow.
Each proposal has a title, abstract, proposal type, and a scientific category including keywords.
The PI decides on the co-investigators on their project, specifies who will be the reviewer for the
distributed review process, and whether that person holds a PhD.
The proposal contains a science plan, which is made up of one or more SGs. For each SG, the PI
must provide all necessary information for the observation: the target properties including sky location
and brightness (“Field Setup” node); the spectral setup (“Spectral Setup” node), specifying the observ-
ing band, the frequency position of spectral windows and their bandwidth and spectral resolution;
the calibration strategy, either ALMA- or user-defined (“Calibration Setup” node); required observa-
tional parameters such as angular resolution and requested sensitivity, which are used to estimate the
observing time (“Control and Performance” node); and a technical justification regarding the chosen
parameters and proposed SGs (“Technical Justification” node). The “planning and time estimate” in
the “Control and Performance” node is calculated by generating virtual Scheduling Blocks that are
invisible to the PI at Phase 1.
Submitted proposals can be opened as new proposals from the archive such that they can be
resubmitted under a new project code or used as templates such that their SGs can be copied into a
new proposal. During validation, the OT checks that the proposed project is valid and can be observed
as requested. Only once all validation errors are cleared can the project be submitted.
The OT also provides a stand-alone sensitivity calculator and a PDF generator for the proposal.
After the submission deadline a PI’s proposal can be retrieved and opened in read-only mode.
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 12 of 53
4.1.2 Use Case B - Phase 1 SB generation
This stage starts soon after the proposal deadline. With the Phase 1 batch mode, the Phase 1
SBs are generated and uploaded to the archive together with the project. Phase 1 SBs are normally
not visible to the PI but provide important information for internal use. The Phase 1 SBs provide
representative coordinates, estimated execution durations, and angular resolution constraints among
other science specific constraints (time constraints, weather constraints, etc). This information is used
to create a “pressure" for each project by LST range, configuration, and weather requested and aids
in the queue building process. The Phase 1 SBs are also used to identify resubmissions and duplicate
observationsandgiveinputforDSOstatisticsandP2Gtechnicalassessment. Atthisstage, allproposal
PDFs are regenerated to make sure that there are no issues in the formatting, etc. These are the PDFs
that are then provided to reviewers during the proposal review process.
4.1.3 Use Case C - Phase 2 SB generation
At this stage, with the Phase 2 batch mode, all accepted proposals are turned into Programs by
copying their Proposal SGs to the Program level and generating Phase 2 SBs from the information in
the Program SGs. The Phase 2 SBs are in principle observatory-ready but are checked by P2G before
the start of the observations to tackle multiple topics referred in P2G’s Best Practices.
4.1.4 Use Case D - Phase 2 SB editing
Unlike the Phase 1 SBs, the Phase 2 SBs are displayed in the OT (Program tab). The PI sees
all parameters in the SBs in read-only mode. Superusers like P2G have editing rights and can change
almost any parameter. However, validation checks ensure that the project stays valid. A validation
run needs to be executed before P2G can re-submit a modified program. Scheduling blocks connected
to an SG can be regenerated with the OT if no observations have been started yet.
P2G uses the Phase 2 batch mode in a different way to allow flexibility, such as SB generation only
for some SGs within a Project, or to edit parameters at the SB level. For that purpose, P2G needs to
provide the OT with an input file in xml format referencing the projects and SBs by using their UID’s,
sources by name or intent, etc... Currently, one example that is making use of this batch mode is the
implementation of TP OFF positions in an automated way.
SBs are edited manually to implement change requests from the PIs, define fixed calibrators, limit
hour angle (HA) ranges, or improve spectral setups to avoid known issues or improve calibration. A
complete set of usual edits and actions done by P2Gs is described in the current Cycle’s P2G Best
Practices page on confluence.
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 13 of 53
4.1.5 Use Case E - Commissioning
For commissioning of new modes or extensive testing of non-standard setups the OT is released as
a separate build. Unlike the OT for PIs, the CSV6 version has (some of) the modes-to-be-commissioned
already implemented and allows unrestricted access to all editable parameters, especially on the SB
level, related to the observational setup. Since CSV projects are unrestricted, validation can be per-
formed and provides useful information, but validation errors do not prohibit submission. The com-
missioning scientist is fully responsible for the validity of the SB, not the OT.
Only superusers with the right credentials are allowed to prepare and submit CSV projects. A
submitted CSV project receives a “.csv” suffix to distinguish it from PI-submitted projects. A CSV
project does not require a Proposal or Phase 1 SG or SB; it is directly created as a Program using
manually created (or copied) SG(s). The Phase 2 SBs are generated from the Program SG(s).
Within a generated SB there are no restrictions to the editing of any parameters. Within the
main “Resources” tab (containing three sub-tables: “field sources”, “instrument setups”, “observing
parameters”) all properties can be edited. In short, this allows access to where the telescope points in
the sky, the spectral setup, the integration times, the schedule of calibrators, etc. Parts or all of an SB
can be copied into another SB for easier project building from a common SB already made.
Specifics of the Spectral Setup: The current OT interface provides an easy visualization of all
options that the commissioning team might want to test (e.g., different frequency resolutions, different
spectral averaging, default spectral presets). Access to the spectral setup builder and visualizer at the
SG level is essential for generating at least the first draft spectral setup that propagates to a generated
SB. Despite all parameters being editable at the SB level, often commissioning scientists rather use
the SG spectral setup node and then simply regenerate the SB(s). The “instrumental setup” sub-tab
is mainly used7 to adjust correlator timing away from defaults that the OT has encoded (i.e., faster or
slower integration durations).
4.2 Requirements
We recommend the preparation of two tools: the user-facing Phase 1 WSU-OT and a new ALMA-
internal “SB Builder” (and editor). We foresee that the second tool will encompass the use cases B, C,
D, and E for ALMA-internal use. The preparation and editing of SBs is essential for the Observatory.
The distinction into Phase 1 and Phase 2 SBs is not necessary anymore. Furthermore, this distinction
6CSV stands for commissioning and science verification. This term has transitioned to EOC - the extension and
optimization of capabilities. In recent years, the terms CSV/EOC are often used interchangeably.
7Original ALMA commissioning occurred over a decade ago, where more flexibility was likely required in chang-
ing/editing/adding extra fields, extra instrumental setups or extensively testing observing parameters not encoded in
the OT. Within the last couple of years, in ‘EOC’, the SG nodes are largely used to set up the majority of the project
with only final tweaks that require editing within the SB.
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 14 of 53
can lead to issues if the preparation tool for Phase 1 and Phase 2 SBs changes in between generating
those two types of SBs, for example due to updates as is often seen with the classic OT.
InvestigatorsonlyneedtoknowasubsetofthePhase2SBparameterstojudgeiftheirobservations
are set up correctly. It will be sufficient to display these parameters in the Snooping Project Interface
(SnooPI). This will require an expansion of SnooPI’s capabilities. However, their description is out of
scope for this report.
The below requirements are written as ‘User Stories’, that are brief and simple descriptions of
what a software must do from the perspective of a user. The necessary and beneficial requirements
generally translate to need and want respectively (also see Section 6.5), while the requirements, or
recommended ways forward, are also listed directly in some user stories. If not specifically highlighted,
already existing capabilities of the ALMA-OT are not listed here.
4.2.1 Requirements for the WSU-OT
1. As an investigator, I want a guided tour of the interface so that I can understand how to use the
tool without prior experience.
(a) This requires the preparation of video tutorials and documentation by the OT WG which
can be made available directly through the WSU-OT.
2. As an investigator, I want access to spectral setup templates or examples so that I can turn my
science requirements more easily into a SPW setup.
(a) This requires the preparation of spectral setup templates by the Observatory.
3. As an investigator, I need a simple interface to configure my spectral setup so that I can visualize
my spectral coverage in the more complex context of the WSU which will provide a larger choice
of options.
(a) The high level requirements for the spectral setup are listed in Section 6.5.
4. As an investigator, I need version control or change history so that I can revert to earlier edits if
needed.
(a) This will also allow manipulation of the SG level by P2G without overwriting the user input.
5. As an investigator, I want to see an elevation vs. time plot for all my targets in a science goal so
that I can understand over which LST range my targets will be observable.
6. As an investigator, I want to know during which months my proposed observations could be
conducted and I want to see, for each month, the fraction of time when atmospheric conditions
(PWV and phase stability) are expected to meet the requirements of my Science Goal, so that I
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 15 of 53
can assess the environmental feasibility of my observations and adjust the setup if needed.
7. As an investigator or P2G assignee of a project with user-defined calibration, I want to see the
simulated observing sequence to check if the proposed changes to the standard calibration are
valid.
(a) This requires alignment with SSR.
8. As an investigator or P2G assignee of an ephemeris or Target of Opportunity (ToO) or time-
critical (TC) project, I want to know if my resolution requirements are in conflict with the
configuration plan so that I can adjust them if necessary.
(a) This requires alignment with DSA.
9. As an investigator of a ToO project, I want the option to trigger each visit independently or with
time dependencies so that I can choose the strategy that best fits my observations.
10. As an investigator, I want to declare dependencies between SGs so that I can propose back-to-
back observations in different bands.
(a) This requires a connection between SBs of the SGs in questions so that scheduler is aware
of the corresponding linkage.
11. As an investigator or P2G assignee, I need to be aware where the WVR and other known
instrumentation leakages fall so that I can assess their impact on the science goal(s).
12. As an investigator, I want to create a single large mosaic at the SG level so that I can propose
for mosaics exceeding the 150 pointing limit.
(a) TheOTwillberesponsibleforthesplittingofthelargemosaicintoindependentMOUS/SBs
with smaller mosaics which are in agreement with the 150 pointing limit.
13. As an observatory, we need to make sure that resubmissions are already marked as such during
the proposal preparation and submission stage so that resubmitted projects are identified quickly
after submission and without much human intervention.
(a) This would be applied if the investigator opens the original project as a new proposal in the
OT and subsequently does not make significant changes to the project.
(b) This might require an APDM addition to record information of the original project.
(c) This needs coordination with JAO since there is already a project in the works being pro-
posed.
14. As PHT, we need to automatically regenerate all PDFs in case they are corrupted so that we can
provide the correct PDFs to the reviewers.
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 16 of 53
4.2.2 Requirements for the SB Builder
The SB Builder (and editor− replacing the “Program” side of the current OT) is envisioned as a
web-based tool which will generate all xml control files for the telescope observations. It will use the
information stored in the SGs in the WSU-OT to ‘build’ the corresponding SBs. The tool will also
allow edits to the parameters on the GOUS/MOUS/SB levels. Below details new requirements for the
tool, but does not necessarily repeat features which are already implemented in the current OT Phase
2 Program side.
15. Asaninvestigator, IneedtocalculateobservingtimesforagivensensitivitysothatIcanestimate
if a project is feasible.
16. As an investigator, I need to have read-only access to the important parameters of the scheduling
blocks of my projects so that I can check that the observations are set up correctly.
(a) We recommend that the user-facing side of the Project SBs (Phase 2) will be implemented
in SnooPI.
17. As an investigator of a ToO project, I need to submit source coordinates and velocities that are
readily implemented in the SB so that the triggered SB can be set to Ready as fast as possible.
(a) This requires a connection of some sort with the interface PIs will use to trigger their
observations and submit source specifications. The flexibility to change tuning likely needs
more discussion, and potentially will need human intervention.
18. As P2G of a ToO project, I need the PI-provided information to be automatically implemented
on the SB level of the triggered SB and the SB set to Ready without my intervention.
19. As OT, I need a time estimate for each science goal so that I can give a total time for a proposal.
(a) This requires alignment with SSR and a connection between the WSU-OT and the SB
Builder.
20. As Observatory, we need the preparation of scheduling blocks for all submitted proposals so that
the information provided in the scheduling blocks helps in the project selection exercise.
21. As scheduling team, we need TM1 and TM2 SBs to have a connection not-relying on their names
so that scheduler can easily identify their linkage or be aware of new ones if need be.
22. As resubmission/duplication team, we need the preparation of scheduling blocks for all submitted
proposals so that we can check for resubmissions and duplicate projects.
23. As P2G team, we need investigators to be able to submit minor change requests to the helpdesk
and have the changes automatically implemented in their scheduling blocks so that involvement
of P2G is not required.
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 17 of 53
24. As P2G team, we need to manually manipulate one or several fields in one or several SBs in one
project so that we can work more efficiently.
25. As P2G team, we need to automatically manipulate one or several fields in one or several SBs in
one or several projects so that we can work more efficiently.
26. As P2G team, we need to automatically regenerate scheduling blocks (not necessarily in all SGs
in a project) so that any updates impacting the information in the SBs can be easily applied.
27. As P2G team, we want to resolve J-name calibrators directly from the ALMA Source Catalogue
so that calibrator searches are more efficient.
28. As P2G team, we need the OT to split spectral-scan or multi-tuning observations into different
MOUS/SB levels if the original SB requires more than one execution and if the splitting does
not compromise the scientific goal so that observations are more efficient.
(a) This may require an “opt-out” feature in case the PI prioritizes flux scaling between tunings
rather than observation efficiency.
29. As P2G team, we need to know which SBs triggered Attention Flags (i.e., observation specifica-
tions/modes that need attention from P2G assignees) so that P2G can focus on the correctness
checks of those SBs.
30. As cone search and TP Off position teams, we need to automatically hardwire specific calibrators
or update calibrator setup parameters, and TP OFF position fields so that SBs can be set to
Ready more efficiently.
31. As a VLBI/Phased-Array P2G assignee, I need to add a VLBI schedule file (VEX format) either
at the SG or SB levels so that VLBI observations can be conducted.
(a) VEX format (Rev 15b1 links: definition and parameters) is a standard file used for VLBI
schedule planning that each station uses as reference for a given coordinated observation. It
shows which sources are to be observed when by which stations in a given frequency setup
(a "VLBI ephemeris" file).
(b) If the VLBI schedule file is added at the SG level, the assignee may need to add more than
one file (each one corresponding to a different observing date), in which case the OT will
need to create independent MOUS/SB levels for each VEX file.
32. As commissioning team, we need to interactively manipulate all parameters of the scheduling
blocks so that test observations for existing or new modes can be set up efficiently.
33. As commissioning team, we need validation errors to be inconsequential so that we can submit
any project at any time.
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 18 of 53
34. As commissioning team, we need to make “non-standard” SBs so that we can test different setups.
35. As commissioning team, we need to simulate the scheduling blocks so that we can test that they
run correctly.
(a) We recommend an interaction with OSS code (or a back-end) as to align what the SB
Builder shows with what the telescope will run.
36. As commissioning team, we need a feasibility assessment/probability tool (LST ranges and at-
mospheric conditions) so that we can plan when to ideally schedule the SBs.
5 APDM
The information of any Observing Project is stored in the ALMA Project Data Model (APDM).
The APDM defines a series of generic structures that are shared by all Observing Projects, including
the project status, the proposal information, the outcome of the proposal review process, and the
scheduling blocks (SBs) with their inter-dependencies. All these structures are filled with the relevant
information (or with links to it in the Archive) at the time of the creation of the project, and updated
accordingly during its complete lifecycle.
Over the years, the APDM has evolved while adhering to the principle that no elements are
renamed or removed to prevent disruptions in the distributed software system. To maintain APDM
backward compatibility while allowing new correlator configurations to adopt a clean design, these
new configurations will be integrated into the APDM independently, remaining separate from existing
correlator configurations, and without altering or removing any components of the original APDM.
This design decision is detailed in Section 3.1 of the “WSU APDM TSI Report” [RD6].
Section 3.2 of the same report presents a proposal for APDM modifications necessary to support
the WSU SpectralSpec for ATAC and TPGS. As this represents preliminary exploratory work, further
refinement will be required to align with the finalized design decisions for ATAC and TPGS. A func-
tional prototype of the APDM with the WSU SpectralSpec was developed as part of the APDM TSI
in 2024, and the APDMEntities generated from this effort may serve as a foundation for initial WSU
OT development.
6 Spectral Setup
The below sub-sections detail the current status of the OT Spectral Setup, summaries of the ATAC
and TPGS technical details (full details can be found in Appendix A and Appendix B), the changes
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 19 of 53
needed for the WSU era, and the high level requirements for the new WSU-OT spectral setup.
6.1 Current Status
ALMA has nine8 different receiver Bands (1, 3-10) that can cover various frequency ranges during
an observation. While setting up a Proposal, per SG, a user can only define one frequency band for an
observation. Based upon the capabilities of the BLC and receivers, only a sub-selection of the possible
entire frequency range that constitutes as a ‘band’ can be observed at any one time.
The current Spectral Setup node in the OT consists of the Spectral Visualizer (see Figure 1) and
the Spectral Setup interface to aid a user in producing a scientifically useful set of SPWs.
Figure 1: Current OT Spectral Setup Visualizer before any SPWs are defined. The receiver bands
are labeled on the top-most axis numerically (1, 3 to 10). Each band comprises two “boxes”, referring
to the LO1 range (bottom box) and the full band coverage (upper box). The continuous plotted line
is the atmospheric transmission profile, indicating how ‘transparent’ the atmosphere is at different
frequencies. The Rest and Observed (Sky) frequencies (top and bottom axes) are equal as there is no
field (and thus velocity/redshift) specified.
The Spectral Visualizer automatically updates to show the user-defined spectral setup as new
SPWs are added (Figure 2 shows a Band 6 example). Overlaid is the transmission profile, based
upon the water vapour column density, either automatically or manually chosen between 1st and 7th
octile (1st being the best weather conditions with highest transmission). In addition, the user can
select spectral lines with the spectral line picker and overlay their positions in frequency. The Spectral
Visualizer allows zooming into the chosen band as well as further into the defined SPWs, along with
scrolling left and right, thus moving ‘down’ and ‘up’ the frequency range.
8Band 2 forms the 10th receiver to be commissioned - occurring before the TWO.
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 20 of 53
Figure 2: Current OT Spectral Setup Visualizer with SPWs defined (blue horizontal lines) covering
molecular lines of interest (blue vertical lines and labels show the SPWs’ central frequency and adopted
naming). Multiple spectral lines of possible interest within the same band are over-plotted and labeled
(red lines), while the regions the SPWs can be defined within are indicated by the yellow regions - these
being predefined based on the IF range of the receiver band (IF = 4.5 - 10GHz in Band 6) from the
LO1 (central yellow line). The suitable observing conditions for Band 6 are the 5th Octile.
The concept of rest frequency is by-definition measured when a target is at rest, i.e., not moving.
With respect to spectral lines, this would be a lab measured frequency for a given molecular or atomic
compound, for example, selectable from the spectral line picker. Sky (observed) frequencies are what
ALMA needs to be configured to observe due to the motion of the target sources with respect to
the motion of the Earth. Rest/sky frequencies are adjusted depending on the line-of-sight velocity or
redshift of the source as entered by the User in the Field Setup node. Currently, there is no attempt
to predict the Doppler correction at the possible date (range) of observation to further validate the
requested tuning.
6.1.1 Basic description of the Phase 1 spectral setup
Within the frequency range of interest there are four so-called Basebands within which SPWs
are defined (these are not plotted in the Visualizer but are rather related to correlator resources).
Basebands, and the SPWs within, can be positioned in regions related to the Intermediate Frequency
(IF)oftheselectedreceiverbandLocalOscillator(LO)frequency. Forexample, Band6canhaveanLO
between 221 and 265 GHz, and has a usable IF of 4.5-10 GHz. Thus, with an LO of 221 GHz, spectral
windows can be placed in frequency ranges, 211-216.5 GHz and 225.5-231 GHz. The lower and upper
ranges are defined as Lower- (LSB) and Upper- (USB) Sidebands. For Bands 3 to 8, it is not possible
to put three basebands in one sideband and the fourth one in the other9; only two per sideband, or
all four in one sideband, are allowed. Each baseband can be filled with between one and four SPW
selections where available correlator resources must be shared. Considering the architecture of the
BLC, SPWs may only be assigned specific combinations of bandwidth and spectral resolution - i.e.,
9You can have three basebands in one sideband but the fourth cannot be defined in the other sideband.
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 21 of 53
there are a limited number of ‘channel’ resources, the divisions of a SPW into resolution elements, and
thus the widest bandwidth SPWs have a low to mid-spectral resolution compared to narrow bandwidth
SPWs that can have the highest (finest) spectral resolution.
A selected SPW has properties that define entirely the spectral frequency range (start, end, cen-
ter), bandwidth, and spectral resolution (channelization) for the correlator to use. The exact restric-
tions/limitations of these selections follow rules due to the BLC architecture. For further details see
ALMA Technical Handbook ([RD1]) Sections 4 and 6.
AUsercanchoosefromthreedifferentspectralobservationtypes: SpectralLine, SingleContinuum
and Spectral Scan. The selection of these types tailors the editable options for the spectral window
setup.
Spectral Line: The user can choose between single (XX), dual (XX, YY), and full polarization (XX,
XY, YX, YY) - in Bands 1, 3-7 (and only single and dual polarization in Bands 9/10). The SPWs can
be added to basebands by entering the rest or sky frequency or via the spectral line picker (centralizing
the SPW on a selected spectral line - as Figure 2). Whenever a SPW is added, a correlator resource
has to be explicitly selected from a range of predefined bandwidth/resolution combinations available.
Further spectral averaging of a selected spectral resolution is possible by factors 2, 4, 8, and 16, if
the full spectral resolution is not required for the user’s science case or to reduce data rates within
pre-defined ALMA limits. To increase sensitivity, the user can choose to use the 4-bit correlator mode
for a given SPW; this option indicates that the correlator resources should be reallocated to use more
‘bits’ at the cost of spectral resolution at a given bandwidth. The OT will sort the SPWs in increasing
frequency, except for VLBI cases when specific frequencies need to be placed in BB1, which will not
necessarily be the lowest ones.
ThecentralfrequencyoftherepresentativeSPW10 (whichcanbemanuallyselectedbythePI/user)
is used for the time estimate displayed in the Control and Performance node, and subsequently used
for scan lengths of the generated SB in Phase 2. Users are able to only select and position the Spectral
Windows, but they have no access to the LO parameter that is optimally calculated by the OT.
Single Continuum: For each band, one setup is pre-defined. The predefined default option offers
the best sensitivity range available in the band. The sky frequency of the continuum setup can be
adjusted but the relative placing of the SPWs is fixed. The user can choose between low and high
spectral resolution observations (two options only for the correlator resources) and can adjust the
spectral averaging of the high resolution setup. As for spectral line observations, the user can choose
between single, dual, and full polarization (Bands 1, 3-7; single or dual for Bands 9/10) and can select
10The concept of a Representative Spectral Window is used in Quality Assurance stages (see also [RD1]) after data
acquisition where the quality to be met is checked in that specific ‘representative’ SPW.
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 22 of 53
the representative SPW. By definition, a continuum setup always offers the maximal possible total
aggregate bandwidth (7.5GHz for Bands 1, 3-8, and 15GHz for Bands 9 and 10).
SpectralScan: Theusermustspecifyacontiguousfrequencycoverage, definedinskyfrequency, that
they want to observe. Up to five spectral setup tunings are chosen automatically by the OT to cover
the requested frequency range. Larger frequency ranges that cannot be achieved in a single SG must
be split over multiple SGs. The user can choose from six combinations of bandwidth/resolution, which
influences the achieved scan frequency range - higher spectral resolution means a reduced aggregate
bandwidth and, thus, more spectral tunings (possibly within additional SGs) are required to cover a
given frequency range. The user can only choose between single and dual polarization.
For all spectral types, the user can set the representative frequency freely within the defined SPWs. In
addition, the user can define rest frequencies of spectral lines that will be covered. This information is
used during data reduction but does not alter the spectral window setup.
6.2 ATAC
6.2.1 Overview of capabilities for users
The Advanced Technology ALMA Correlator (ATAC) will dramatically increase the science output
possible for ALMA users in the WSU era. It will:
1. provide 16GHz per polarization of total correlated bandwidth, or up to twice the bandwidth
capability of the current BLC,
2. be readily upgradable to 4x bandwidth (32 GHz per polarization) with additional funding, per
WSU Milestone 5,
3. provide a 17% improvement compared to the BLC in the digital sensitivity of the WSU signal
chain, even before connecting to upgraded front end receivers,
4. be built to handle up to 80 independent SPWs in the initial 2x bandwidth deployment, with
flexible options for SPW bandwidth (in increments of 200 MHz) and spectral resolution (with no
reduction in bandwidth) using channel averaging factors,
5. provide a total of up to 1.2 million 13.5 kHz wide spectral channels, summed over all SPWs, with
a resulting resolution of 0.1 km/s at a frequency of 35GHz (Band 1),
6. provide Zoom windows for user science cases that require better than 13.5 kHz resolution, which
trade bandwidth for spectral resolution in 200 MHz increments and use Zoom factors of 2, 4, or
8, and
7. support up to 8 concurrent correlator subarrays, enabling correlation of up to 8 separate concur-
rent 7-m and 12-m antenna arrays.
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 23 of 53
6.2.2 ATAC functionality
This subsection briefly summarizes the functionality of ATAC. A more detailed description, to-
gether with explanatory figures, can be found in Appendix A.
ATAC will operate in three stages (Appendix A.1):
1. Coarse channelization: ATAC will create 201 Frequency Slices (FS), each 200MHz wide,
to cover the IF=0 to 20GHz range for each sideband and polarization, regardless of the IF
bandwidth being used. The FS will be set in a fixed frequency grid which is defined solely by
the LO1 frequency chosen. The FS available for selection for processing in the following stages
depend on the anti-aliasing baseband filter and the selected receiver IF bandwidth (Figure 3,
and see Appendix A.2). The filter shapes drawn are merely representative approximations of
the WIFP baseband filter (which is not yet known in detail) and receiver bandwidths; they are
meant to show conceptually how the different filters and performance interact to constrain the
usable bandwidth, though the true shapes of the filters are more complicated.
2. Frequencysliceprocessing: EachselectedFSispassedtoanALMAFrequencySliceProcessor
(AFSP). ATAC will deliver 80 AFSPs for the initial 2x bandwidth deployment, and it is being
built to run with 160 AFSPs in the eventual upgrade to 4x bandwidth.
3. Spectral Window creation: ATAC can stitch together any selected FSs that are contiguous
in frequency and share a selected spectral resolution to create a SPW; the entire SPW can be
assigned a single integer channel averaging factor (CAF) to achieve that spectral resolution. In
practice, a range of possible SPW bandwidth and CAF combinations has been proposed to limit
complexity in the system and minimize data rates (see Appendix A.3).
ATACwillprovidehighfrequencyresolutionacrossthefull16GHz(2x)bandwidth, andeventually
32GHz(4x)bandwidth, withafinestchannelwidthof13.5kHzandtimeresolutionof∼1second. Both
higher time cadence observations, and higher spectral resolution observations (i.e., “zoom" mode), will
also be possible at a cost of correlator resources along another axis. For example, high time cadence (16
ms)observationscanbeperformedwithalimitationinspectralresolution, andzoommodeobservations
can be performed with a reduction in aggregate bandwidth (see Appendix A.4).
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 24 of 53
Figure 3: First panel: An IF = 0 to 20GHz range is displayed with visual approximations of the
anti-aliasing baseband filter (blue trace) and IF = 4.5 to 10 GHz receiver range of Band 6v1 (orange
box and trace), where the LO1 has been set to 225.0 GHz. These traces define the usable frequency
range for science observations in current Band 6, which ATAC can cover with 56 FS (second panel).
The dark gray shaded FS indicate the 56 usable FS in both the upper and lower sidebands, indicating
a total of 11 GHz/polarization. The pink trace (in all panels) indicates the atmospheric transmission
for Band 6. Third and fourth panels: The same information is shown for the upgraded Band 6v2.
LO1 has been set to 235.0 GHz, and ATAC can cover the IF = 4 to 18 GHz range with 140 usable FS
(a total of 28 GHz/polarization).
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 25 of 53
6.3 TPGS
The Total Power GPU Spectrometer (TPGS) subsystem is designed to process data from up
to four Total Power antennas, supporting a single subarray at a time. It will handle a total science
bandwidth of up to 32 GHz per polarization (4x WSU bandwidth). TPGS can create up to 160 spectral
windows with up to 80,000 spectral channels per spectral window per polarization in dual-polarization
mode, or 40,000 channels per polarization in full-polarization mode. Since TPGS also adopts the FFX
architecture used in ATAC, spectral windows can be formed by stitching together multiple frequency
slices.
The basic spectral resolution of TPGS is 13.5kHz as ATAC. TPGS needs to support channel
averagingcapabilitiestomeetthevelocityresolutionrequirementsspecifictothegivenspectralwindows
corresponding to the receiver band. It also supports a zoom mode that enhances spectral resolution
smaller than the base 13.5 kHz by applying a configurable zoom factor of 2, 4, or 8 to each spectral
window independently. For example, a zoom factor of 8 provides a resolution of approximately 1.6875
kHz and reduces the science bandwidth accordingly. The center frequency of each zoom window can
be tuned within its parent frequency slice with a granularity of at least 0.01 MHz.
TPGSsupportsshortintegrationdurationsforlow-resolutionobservations. Theshortestsupported
duration is 16 milliseconds, which applies at coarse frequency resolutions of 5.184 MHz (for 16 GHz
sidebands; Band 2-10) or 2.592 MHz (for 8 GHz sidebands; Band 1). At the finest frequency resolution
of 13.5 kHz, the minimum integration duration increases to 96 milliseconds. Integration durations must
be integer multiples of 16 ms or 96 ms, and frequency resolutions must align with defined step sizes of
13.5 kHz for non-zoom modes and either 5.184 or 2.592 MHz for high-time cadence configurations.
TPGS’s signal chain (for a more detailed description see Appendix B) combines an oversampled
coarsechannelizationwithacriticallysampledfinechannelization, bridgedbycarefullydesignedresam-
plingandfilteringstages, todeliverhigh-resolution, flexiblespectralprocessingacrosswidebandwidths,
with up to 3720 high-quality channels per frequency slice (see Appendix B).
6.4 WSU Spectral Setup Overview
Due to the much more flexible capabilities of the ATAC and TPGS systems, the way to define the
spectral setup of a science goal will have to change fundamentally. This change is necessary in order to
support the observations of the broad range of WSU science cases laid out in ALMA Memo 621 [AD2].
Although both ATAC and TPGS offer significantly more flexibility in the correlator options, i.e.,
various spectral resolutions for the full available bandwidth, and zoom modes with higher spectral res-
olution, the logical rules for the spectral setups are simplified in the typical setup. The full-bandwidth
(16GHz in the initial 2× bandwidth deployment) spectral resolution is 13.5kHz, substantially finer
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 26 of 53
than the 488kHz provided by the BLC and sufficient for the vast majority of science cases. Zoom
modes, which trade bandwidth for even higher spectral resolution, remain available for specific appli-
cations (see Appendix A.4).
In the basic sense, within the WSU OT, once a user has selected an observing Band, the spectral
setup (or rather the SPW positioning) is driven by:
1. the LO frequency - this defines the allowed locations/grid of all available FSs (Appendix A.1)
2. the selection of which FS to use - in the 2x bandwidth WSU, 80 FS resources can be selected to
create observable SPW(s) (Appendix A.3)
3. the desired spectral resolution(s) of the SPW(s)
By default, a manual setup/selection of the SPWs, or individual FSs making up SPWs (see Section
A.3) should be avoided. Rather the WSU-OT shall take an active role in producing the spectral setup
based on user scientific context information and their science case (see Section 6.5.1). A ‘correlator
setup editor’ (see Figure 4) could be made available for experienced PIs as well as ALMA-internal staff
for commissioning or P2G work.
This TSI also identifies that a Spectral Visualizer is an absolute requirement for a clear visual
display of all defined SPWs. The visualizer could also be interactive (e.g., drag and drop, or select and
position SPWs) as a means to adjust/fine tune the WSU-OT derived spectral setup parameters, or to
manually build a spectral setup from scratch.
6.5 Requirements
We have identified the following requirements as necessary (shall) or beneficial (should) for the new
SpectralSetupnodeintheWSU-OT.Therequirementsarebrokendowninto1)highlevelrequirements,
2)specificrequirementsrelatedtothecaptureofuserscienceintent, and3)specificrequirementsrelated
to the visualization and direct editing of the correlator setup.
6.5.1 High level requirements
1. The WSU-OT shall allow users to create spectral setups that utilize the fully commissioned
capabilities of ATAC/TPGS and the available receiver bands for a given cycle.
(a) The WSU-OT shall continue to provide support for the specification of continuum, spectral
line, and spectral scan projects.
(b) The Observatory should additionally design spectral setups for different science cases that
maximize the capabilities of ATAC and offer them as templates to the users (see Section 7-
Table 3).
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 27 of 53
2. The WSU-OT shall translate user science requirements / intents into spectral setups without
required manual intervention by the user.
(a) The WSU-OT should attempt to resolve user input to setups that are as standardized as
possible for optimal pipeline processing and archival value.
3. To achieve valid spectral setups that meet user science requirements, the WSU-OT shall provide
both an interface to best capture user science intent, and an interface to visualize and directly
edit the correlator setup.
(a) These may be the same interface, but are not required to be. The degree of granularity for
interface branching is an implementation decision.
(b) Capturing the science intent may depend on user input across multiple nodes (e.g., Field
Setup and Science Category).
(c) Editing could include selection of FSs, and/or SPWs made up of FSs, and the spectral
resolution of those FS/SPWs.
4. The WSU-OT shall capture and record user science requirements in the APDM (e.g., in a dic-
tionary) for downstream subsystem usage (e.g., by Pipeline or Archive), even for aspects that do
not strictly map into tangible differences in a generated SB.
(a) PI specified content such as spectral lines of interest should be recorded, despite not directly
playing a role in the observed spectral setup in the SB.
5. The WSU-OT shall ensure that spectral setups and calibration setups are well aligned.
(a) The WSU-OT should use user input from the Spectral Setup node to inform calibration
decisions where applicable. This may take the form of modifying options within the Cal-
ibration and Performance node, or feeding into the heuristics for calibration scan setup
during SB creation.
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 28 of 53
Figure 4: A flowchart of the necessary components, user interaction, and information transfer for the
spectral setup node of the WSU-OT. The colors of the boxes are chosen to highlight different steps in the
spectral setup build where one color highlights the continuum, spectral line and spectral scan workflows,
respectively.
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 29 of 53
6.5.2 Capture of user science intent requirements
This TSI has identified the following specific requirements for the capture of user science intent.
The general flow of information envisioned is illustrated in Figure 4, but this should not be considered
to be an implementation specification.
6. Users shall be required to select a receiver band (from the available receiver bands for that cycle)
early in the flow of science intent capture (see Figure 4).
(a) During the TWO depending on the receiver band, either ATAC/TPGS or the receiver band
(e.g., Band 6 v1 with a narrow IF) will limit the maximal available bandwidth. These
restrictions will evolve over time. The intended receiver band for the science goal must thus
be specified early on in a workflow to display the correct capabilities/options to the user.
7. The interface to capture the user’s science intent should be adaptive to a selected user science
category/case.
(a) Points of science case separation shall include at minimum spectral scan vs. spectral line
vs. continuum spectral types, which may be captured prior to other user spectral setup
requirements.
(b) Withinspectrallineandspectralscancases, extra-galacticandGalacticscience(andspecific
fieldsofstudytherein)wereadditionallyrecognizedbythisTSItohavesignificantlydifferent
needs (e.g., linewidths of interest are quite different).
8. The WSU-OT shall allow the user to select spectral setup templates for different science use
cases, tailored upon the general scientific contextual information.
(a) A strong emphasis on template usage shall be made within the new Spectral Setup node
interface.
(b) The WSU-OT should (continue to) strongly encourage the users to provide a realistic source
velocity.
(c) The Observatory shall define default continuum setups for each band.
(d) The Observatory shall define scientific templates for spectral line observations of various
scientific intent for each band.
(e) These templates shall be delivered to the OT along with the guiding principles behind them,
such that the templates can be refined as receiver and correlator capabilities continue to
evolve over time. These templates should be designed to maximize compatibility between
observations for archival combination.
(f) The OT shall tailor the templates displayed to users based upon already specified informa-
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 30 of 53
tion about the user’s science intent.
9. The WSU-OT shall prompt the user to provide a Representative Frequency for any spectral
setup.
(a) A representative frequency shall be defined by default for a given template setup, but shall
be changeable by the user.
10. For continuum setups, the WSU-OT shall provide the user at minimum with the ability to set a
desired frequency resolution.
(a) The user should additionally be able to specify where the continuum setup is located within
aband. Thismaytaketheformofmultipletemplateoptions, orafreeformcentralfrequency
around which a continuum setup is optimized on the fly.
11. For spectral scan setups, the WSU-OT shall at minimum prompt the user to select a frequency
range and spectral resolution for the scan.
(a) The user shall be shown the available bandwidths that can be covered for a given frequency
resolution, based on data rate limitations for that cycle.
12. For spectral line setups, the WSU-OT shall at minimum provide the user the ability to specify
specific spectral lines of interest.
(a) The WSU-OT shall provide an interface for the selection of spectral lines that contains
information from a well-maintained and curated spectroscopy database.
(b) This interface should be performant (i.e., updates in real-time) and streamlined for the user
when multiple lines need to be selected.
(c) The OT should adaptively provide suggestions of other lines of interest to a user, based on
gathered science intent and already specified lines.
(d) The user shall be prompted to specify linewidths/bandwidths and spectral resolutions as
well as a prioritization for all selected lines (e.g., grouping into ‘tiers’).
(e) This interface shall provide a visualization of where the selected lines of interest are located
within the band and relative to a resolved LO and the associated valid FSs, which may
update as the user continues to add lines.
(f) This interface should provide a visualization of the user specified linewidth for each line.
(g) The WSU-OT shall provide a mechanism for automated selection of spectral lines and their
properties (central frequencies, line widths, spectral resolution, prioritization, ...), such as
ingestion of a user supplied file (simple text and/or structured data - e.g., JSON) in a
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 31 of 53
specified file format, and an API.
13. Wheneverauserispromptedtospecifyfrequencyresolutions, theWSU-OTshalldisplaytheclos-
est applicable options based on the capabilities of ATAC/TPGS and the user’s input, including
allowable zoom and non-zoom resolutions with a clear distinction.
(a) Corresponding velocity resolutions shall be displayed along with frequency resolution.
14. The WSU-OT shall attempt to resolve user specified lines of interest into an optimal and valid
spectral setup.
(a) When data rate limitations prevent all lines of interest from being covered at the desired
frequency resolution, the WSU-OT shall favor prioritized lines of interest and the user shall
be notified, allowing them to modify their specifications.
(b) If an existing spectral template covers all requested lines, this template shall be suggested
to the user.
(c) If the user-requested science intent results in unallocated correlator resources, the WSU-OT
should optimize the setup by further allocating resources, such as additional continuum
coverage or borrowing spectral lines from the most similar template. Accepting these sug-
gestions shall be optional for the user.
(d) A set of guidelines for the optimal translation of user science intent into spectral setups
shall be delivered to the OT by the Observatory (see Section 7).
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 32 of 53
6.5.3 Correlator setup and visualization requirements
Figure 5: A mockup of an example visualizer once a user has selected a Band (Band 6 in this case,
where the Band 6v2 receiver will cover roughly 209 to 281GHz), and some lines of interest. Bold font
with boxed names indicate priority lines, black indicates lines that are useful for science but not
priority, while Orange indicates WSU-OT suggested lines that could aid science based on the user’s
priority selection. This is not intended to directly guide design specification, but rather to visually
convey the general intent of the listed requirements.
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 33 of 53
Figure 6: Mockup of an example visualizer once a user has asked the WSU-OT to “create” the SPWs.
Here an additional (connected or separate visualizer display) shows the ATAC range and the FS setup
and the combination of FS to SPWs. This example shows Band 6v2, with a ×2 bandwidth (i.e., 80 FS
resources). Only three hypothetical spectral resolutions were used in this case, and SPWs conform to
the allowed sum of FS (e.g., blue has 15, 5, 10, 5, and 5 FSs for five SPWs, making bandwidths of 3, 1,
2, 1, and 1GHz respectively.) This is not intended to directly guide design specification, but rather to
visually convey the general intent of specific requirements; frequency ranges are not necessarily 100%
accurate. If in an ‘editable’ mode, the FS could be clicked, dragged or SPW blocks overlaid to select
FSs.
This TSI has identified the following specific requirements for the visualization and direct editing of
the correlator setup. A mockup of the general concepts of these requirements is shown in Figures 5
and 6, but this is only for illustration purposes and should not be considered to be an implementation
specification.
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 34 of 53
16. 15. There shall be an interface for interactively selecting frequency slices to include in a SPW.
(a) See ATAC/TPGS description section for rules/bounds (Section 6.2, Section 6.3, Appendix
A, and Appendix B).
(b) Importantly, it is possible to allocate multiple AFSPs to the same FS (e.g., for a zoom mode
or overlapping spectral windows).
(c) This interface should be intuitive to use and allow for on-the-fly modification (e.g., a selec-
tion is not permanent once made). “When-to-meet” (https://www.when2meet.com/) was
mentioned as an example of a similar commercial interface.
(d) TheOTshalltranslatetheselectedfrequencyslicesintodefinedspectralwindowsandrecord
these in the APDM.
The interface shall graphically illustrate where each spectral tuning (including LO and sidebands)
is located within the band frequency coverage.
(a) There shall be a mechanism to switch between spectral tunings when there are multiple
tunings for a spectral scan (e.g., possibly a clickable ‘tab’ interface similar to a web browser).
17. The interface shall graphically illustrate the frequency slice grid and highlight the selected
FS/AFSPs in frequency space.
(a) This illustration shall provide an overlay of spectral lines of interest when known.
(b) This illustration shall provide an overlay of atmospheric transmission as a function of fre-
quency.
(c) There shall be a graphical representation of frequency resolution chosen for each selected
FS (e.g., potentially via color coding).
18. The interface shall display the number of remaining allocatable AFSPs and the total data rate
and aggregate bandwidth associated with currently allocated AFSPs.
19. The interface shall allow for the allocation and editing of zoom mode AFSPs:
(a) There are various possible designs, including:
• A given FS (of 200MHz) selected to be used in zoom mode will entirely be converted
into a zoom window (e.g., a selection 2× spectral resolution will use two AFSPs, or 8×
spectral resolution will use 8 AFSPs)11
.
11In this scenario the minimal zoom window bandwidth will be 200MHz and is foreseen to alleviate a number of
calibration issues associated with very narrow bandwidths.
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 35 of 53
• The user specifies the resolution, central frequency and bandwidth, that are free pa-
rameters within ATAC/TPGS constraints. More AFSPs are used for multiple zoom
windows within one 200MHz FS, each of which can have independently tunable cen-
ter frequencies (e.g. an 8× spectral resolution using one ASFP will have 8× lower
bandwidth).
(b) As with any contiguous AFSPs, contiguous zoom mode AFSPs will resolve to a single
spectral window (up to the SPW definition constraints imposed for a given cycle, including
those in ATAC Memo 24).
(c) The interface shall allow for zoom windows to overlap the same frequency range as any
standard (non-zoom) FS selected.
6.5.4 Updates for future milestone
It is worth noting that edits to requirements and later implementations and specifications will
be needed when the bandwidth of the system is changed from 2× WSU to 4× WSU, especially in
considering rules about where FS (or SPWs) can be set up (see Section 6.2.2 and Appendix A). Such
changes may affect the proposed templates and logic that the WSU-OT is required to have, as well as
their interactions with available IF ranges on new receiver bands when these are delivered.
It may be worth considering (beyond this TSI) the workflow requirements for given milestones
dependent on various scenarios where new hardware is delivered (i.e., receiver bands with respect to
4× WSU bandwidth).
7 Deliverables
Below details the deliverables for the design of the WSU-OT and the SB Builder while also iden-
tifying the responsible stakeholders. In some cases preferred timescales are noted. The information
is tabulated with grouping for: external teams, ALMA stakeholders, and ALMA staff with respect to
deliverables that require additional investigation. If not specifically listed the OT SSS will naturally
be the contact point.
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 36 of 53
7.1 ALMA Internal and External Stakeholders
Table 1: Deliverables from teams external to ALMA Science Operations
Deliverable Stakeholder Comments Timeline
D.1: Define the transla-
tion/conversion library for
the ATAC spectral config-
uration to the WSU-OT
spectral setup
ATAC Team The library is required as to con-
vert the FS and/or SPW setups that
the WSU-OT will generate into the
correct spectral specifications that
ATAC require to be written in the
APDM. The library, or rather the
format rules it contains could also
steer how the WSU-OT deals with
FSs/SPWs in the spectral setup node
and what is presented to users.
Expected October
2025
D.2: Define the transla-
tion/conversion library for
the TPGS spectral config-
uration to the WSU-OT
spectral setup
TPGS Team The library is required as to con-
vert the FS and/or SPW setups that
the WSU-OT will generate into the
correct spectral specifications that
TPGS require to be written in the
APDM. The TPSG team plans to
reuseATAC’sconfigurationlibraryas
much as possible, not only to min-
imize the development effort of the
TPGS team, but also to minimize the
impact on the WSU-OT development
team by reusing the same (or almost
the same) library interface as ATAC.
Timeline to be
confirmed after
TPGS-PDR
(scheduled in
January 2026).
Table 2: Deliverables from ALMA stakeholders
Deliverable Stakeholder Comments Timeline
D.3: Endorsement of fur-
ther studies
ISOpT Based on this TSI, it was realized
considerable work pertaining to the
spectral specification details - the
majorityoftheitemslistedinSection
7.2 - were not possible to accomplish
in the timeline (or within the scope)
of this TSI.
With 1 month
of the delivery
of this TSI
D.4: Define the rules for al-
lowedbandcoverageandFS
positions (based on allowed
LO1 ranges) for the WSU-
OT spectral setup
OT SSS and
ATAC/TPGS
Teams
This work blocks further studies re-
lated to creating SPWs
From Q3 2025
Continued on next page
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 37 of 53
Table 2: Deliverables from ALMA stakeholders (Continued)
Deliverable Stakeholder Comments Timeline
D.5: Update the sensitiv-
ity calculation equation and
parameter space
OT SSS,
ATAC/TPGS
Team, v2 Re-
ceiver/Development
teams
Define the parameters for the sensi-
tivity calculation based on new ef-
ficiencies, bandwidths and spectral
resolution options. Will depend on
new Tsys and Trec values.
Begin early 2026
(and continually
with new receiver
development)
D.6: Update the beam size
calculation
OT SSS, ATAC
Scientists (in-
cluding Pipeline,
CASA, Schedul-
ing, DMG,
ISOpT)
Recalculate the effective beam-size
giventhebandwidthandfrequencyof
the Representative Spectral Window
- that can be larger than the current
SPW options
Begin early 2026
(and continually
with new receiver
development).
Policy input
required as this
relates to QA.
D.7: Define the list of
allowed/valid observing
modes and contingencies
for WSU operation
IST,ISOpT,Com-
missioning
By definition all modes should be in-
cluded in the WSU-OT, however, de-
pending on the progress of commis-
sioning, at the start of WSU oper-
ations some of the currently offered
modes may, or may not have been
(re)-commissioned. A maintained list
built from current milestones (similar
to [RD4], but likely a detailed roll-
out plan considering commissioning
progress) needs to be available to the
WSU-OT and SB Builder.
InitiateinQ42025
-activelymaintain
D.8: Define data rate vol-
umes and limitations with
an expected timeline
ICT, IDT, IST,
ISOpT (Pipeline
if processing
limited)
The WSU-OT needs to include lim-
iters into the spectral setup and al-
lowed combinations based upon tech-
nical aspects of the signal chain, pro-
cessingoroperationalreasonsforlim-
iting spectral and/or observing se-
tups.
Discussion to be-
gin as soon as
known - need first
implementation 1
year before WSU
milestone 1
D.9: Detail the specifica-
tionoftheIVCandIVZoom
modes in ATAC and the im-
pact on the WSU-OT
ATAC Team, OT
SSS
In this TSI, the ATAC representative
provided some details on correlator
‘modes’ IVC and IVZoom and their
useandrulesfordifferentALMAsub-
arrays. Exchange should take place
between the stakeholders to under-
stand the requirements for WSU-OT
and information it provides down-
stream within the APDM.
Complete by Q1
2026
Continued on next page
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 38 of 53
Table 2: Deliverables from ALMA stakeholders (Continued)
Deliverable Stakeholder Comments Timeline
D.10: Review
SB/MOUS/GOUS re-
quirements in SB Builder
Led by OT-
SSS (including
Pipeline)
For envisaged future GOUS process-
ing in the WSU-era, the WSU-OT
should include all required informa-
tion/parameters into the APDM to
be used downstream or by the state
system, and processing software -
that will be the ALMA Pipeline dur-
ing the TWO.
Begin early 2026
D.11: Refine the require-
ment details and specifica-
tions into implementation
tickets
Led by OT-
SSS/WG and
OT-developers
As a result of this TSI, the fi-
nal ‘implementation-like’ detailed re-
quirements need to be written along
with specifications. This will allow
for a better priorities list to be drawn
up.
Mid-2026
D.12: Define any updates
to the Band-to-Band mode
observing strategy
OT-SSS, EOC
High Frequency
Experts, ATAC
scientist
Band-to-Band is a specific calibra-
tion technique where the calibrator
fields/sources have a different spec-
tralspecificationthatcanalsobetied
to the user’s scientific spectral setup
(in the current operations). This
needs to be reviewed when the WSU-
OT spectral setup is more defined
and both the ATAC and the new re-
ceiver configuration (e.g. LO, IF) are
confirmed.
Late 2026 -
blocked by un-
derstanding first
WSU-OT spectral
setups
D.13: Investigate the cal-
ibrator spectral setup and
calibration best practices in
preparation for WSU obser-
vations
OT-SSS, Cali-
bration Experts,
ATAC scientist,
Pipeline, Telcal
It is possible that a different spec-
tral setup, i.e., with channel av-
eraging, could be used for calibra-
tor scans, while calibrator sequenc-
ing and scan times could/may need
refinement. Investigation is needed
to confirm how the WSU data will
be calibrated. Spectral setup changes
will need to be known by the WSU-
OT.
Begin early 2026
D.14: Detail the require-
ments of VLBI and Phased-
array setups
VLBI experts (in-
cluding external)
The specific spectral setup(s) re-
quired for VLBI and phase array
modes should be reviewed for WSU
operations.
Begin early 2026
Continued on next page
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 39 of 53
Table 2: Deliverables from ALMA stakeholders (Continued)
Deliverable Stakeholder Comments Timeline
D.15: Detail the require-
ments for Solar mode
Solar Experts,
ATAC scientist
(for input)
Solar observations use a limited
spectral setup but also have ad-
ditional high-cadence timing which
could limit the selection of spectral
options.
Begin early 2026
D.16: Implement a
knowledge exchange sys-
tem/meeting between
ALMA scientists and OT
developers
ICT EU lead and
OT SSS
Within the context of the science
background it was identified that OT
developers could benefit from more
context and/or rules/understanding
of the OT (function, use cases, nu-
ances), specifically on the variability
of spectral setups and receivers used
by ALMA.
Begin Q3 2025
D.17: Produce the APDM
specification/final version
ICT The APDM and edit-ability thereof
is directly required for the WSU-OT.
Deliver Dec 2025
D.18: Detail and report
on the design/separation of
Phase 1 and Phase 2 into
‘Proposal’ and ‘Program’
(users facing WSU-OT and
SB Builder)
OT SSS, OT de-
velopers, P2G
The intention is that the lat-
ter, ‘Program’ interface (also web-
based) would only be accessible
to ALMA staff, and only provide
GOUS/MOUS/SB based informa-
tion
Beginning dis-
cussions from Q4
2025
7.2 Further Studies
Table 3: Deliverables pertaining to further technical work/investigation on the Spectral Setup
Deliverable Stakeholder Comments Timeline
D.19: Identify scientific use
cases / scientific context in-
formation inputs required
for intelligent spectral setup
choices
OT-WG, IST (ad-
ditional scientists)
Prior to building automated algo-
rithms for developing the possible in-
telligent spectral setups (see below),
the requirements for the input infor-
mation a user will provide is required
From Q3 2025
D.20: Investigate and De-
velop a logic (prototype) for
SPW optimization based on
user science case / scientific
context input
OT-WG (addi-
tional scientists)
The WSU-OT should create SPWs
based on user science cases, however
this logical intelligence, and require-
ments of how to begin building it,
do not exist. An investigation is
required as to prototype the inter-
action/translation from user request
into SPWs.
Begin late 2025,
early 2026 - re-
quires input from
"Scientific context
information"
study
Continued on next page
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 40 of 53
Table 3: Deliverables pertaining to further technical work/investigation on the Spectral Setup
(Continued)
Deliverable Stakeholder Comments Timeline
D.21: Development of an
unbiased suggestive logic on
‘other’ science lines of in-
terest based on user science
case / scientific context in-
put
OT-WG (addi-
tional scientists)
A user may specify coverage of only
a few spectral lines, while perhaps
not knowing other possible serendip-
itous discoveries could be made with
other spectral lines within the range
of their basic spectral setup. It is en-
visaged that the WSU-OT provides
options on how to ‘fill’ the remaining
bandwidth (i.e. FS resources).
Begin early 2026,
align with related
work D.19 and
D.20.
D.22: Create a Spectral
Setup Visualizer Mock-up
OT-WG (addi-
tional scientists),
ATAC/TPGS
expert input
Creation of a prototype to begin
definition of detailed requirements
with a transition to specifications for
the WSU-OT visualizer and func-
tionality. Furthermore, such a tool
is required to begin building tem-
plates conforming to those required
for FS/SPW definition and transla-
tion to ATAC configuration. Re-
quires FS/SPW rules knowledge.
Begin when
libraries re-
ceived from
ATAC/TPGS
respectively
D.23: Develop the User
facing spectral setup tem-
plates
OT-WG / Scien-
tists
Section 6.5 indicates that spectral
setup templates are a requirement.
Archival data can be leveraged for
common use cases and how to com-
binewhatwasaccomplishedovervar-
ious projects into single spectral se-
tups as to understand and develop a
base set of requirements. Requires
FS/SPW rules knowledge for final
‘coding’.
Begin Q3-Q4 2025
D.24: Develop templates
for the (re) commissioning
of the WSU
OT-WG and
commissioning
team member(s)
This will be a specific set of op-
tions for (re)-commissioning all ex-
isting ALMA observations. There
shouldbeenoughtowellexercisevar-
ious cases at different bands along
with varied spectral resolution and
mix modes including zoom selection.
Requires FS/SPW rules knowledge
before final ‘coding’. Use of template
directlyintheSBBuilderoratWSU-
OT level interface to be decided.
Begin in 2026
Continued on next page
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 41 of 53
Table 3: Deliverables pertaining to further technical work/investigation on the Spectral Setup
(Continued)
Deliverable Stakeholder Comments Timeline
D.25: Investigation of the
calibration scenario for the
bandpass in the cases using
narrow Zoom SPWs down
to 25MHz
Calibration ex-
perts (additionally
ATAC scientist
and SSR/Control
for requested
input), Pipeline,
MDR
Calibration has proven diffi-
cult/technically impossible for some
BLC SPW setups with narrow
bandwidths (<128MHz bandwidth,
frequency dependent), this could be
problematic for ATAC ‘zoom’ SPWs
(<200MHz bandwidth)
Begin early 2026
8 Priorities and Timeline
In this section, we will detail the priorities regarding the requirements for the development of the
WSU-OT as well as the SB Builder.
The TWO [RD5] timeline (version as of May 2025) foresees the beginning of commissioning in
June 2028, when a first version of the SB builder tool will absolutely be required to generate SBs. A
final version would be needed by mid-2029, that additionally checks for the SB validity and correctness,
while the PI-facing WSU-OT used to ‘Propose’ for ALMA observation would be needed by the first
Call for Proposals in February 2030.
8.1 WSU Timelines
In chronological order, the Commissioning team will be the first user of the WSU-OT and SB
Builder tools as to (re)-commission existing observing modes with the new WSU system, signal chain,
and receivers. Figure 7 indicates the latest ‘tentative’ Gantt chart for the AIVC timeline (May 2025
version). Specifically for relevance to the WSU-OT and SB Builder, Stage-4 will be the period where
WSU Array Elements are available for on-sky observations and indicate when the WSU-OT and SB
Builder with a commissioning functionality will be required (Mid-2028). That said, the AIVC WG
report [RD7] indicates that preparation and generation of testing SBs should already be established
before getting to the on-sky stage 12 as preparation and planning is required.
12Stage 3 onward could already desire the use of WSU-OT made SBs. In reality stages will not start and stop but
likely have overlap. We need to be prepared to run end-to-end-like SBs as soon as possible.
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 42 of 53
Figure 7: Tentative WSU (commissioning AIVC Gantt chart (May 2025 version). The final dates
will still depend on several factors including, but not exclusively, the advancement of WSU-related
development projects and the readiness of software and computing. The hashed cells indicate contingent
time - associated with stage 5 which relates to on sky E2E-like observations.
The WSU-TWO-WG [RD5] (see Figure 8) show a more detailed timeline inclusive of ALMA
Cycle, retrofitted antennas, stages of the ATAC and TPGS, AIV schedule along with the separate
(re)-Commissioning, and the science operations transition milestones and phases. Moreover, the Go-
noGo and Gate reviews are indicated (brown vertical boxes), which are markers as to when ALMA will
decide whether all conditions are met to begin Operations with WSU. At the time of the go-noGO and
Gate reviews, all required components (software, hardware, system operation) need to be effectively
ready.
Figure 8: TWO current timeline indicating the details of the various phases/stages/milestones. Specif-
ically, the Go-noGo is mid-2029 where ideally all components (software, hardware, system operation)
are effectively ready, or close to finalized and indicate WSU operation can go ahead on schedule.
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 43 of 53
8.2 Timeline for proposal and program tools
In Table 4, tentative timelines are listed for the required software components related to the OT
and this TSI. The Go-noGo decision, as described in Section 8.1, is assumed to be Q2 2029 for the
purposes of this table.
Table 4: Timelines for required software
Software Tentative Timeline Comments
APDM for WSU Q4 2025 Code generation obsolescence
needs to be solved and a general
WSU-APDM needs to be provided
to OT.
Prototype spectral visualizer (out-
side WSU-OT)
Q3 2025 - Q1 2026 Developed by ISOpT members in
close collaboration with ICT
OT back-end logic for ATAC Q2 2026 - Q2 2027 All spectral setup rules need to be
clearly defined and agreed upon by
the start date.
OT back-end logic for TPGS Q1 2027 - Q2 2027 TPGS logic implementation, rules
should already be in place.
WSU-OT:Spectralsetupwithtem-
plates - Frontend
Q3 2026 - Q4 2027 Templates will be endorsed by
ISOpT.
SB builder for commissioning
(ATAC)
Q1 2026 - Q3 2027 Needs to be fully tested by Q4
2027.
SB builder for commissioning
(TPGS)
Q3 2026 - Q1 2028 Needs to be fully tested by Q2
2028.
WSU-OT: Full spectral setup (incl.
spectral visualizer)
Q1 2027 - Q2 2029 Needs to be fully tested by Q4
2029.
SB builder full capability Q2 2028 - Q2 2029 Needs to be fully tested by Q4
2029.
SB editor full capability Q2 2028 - Q2 2029 Needs to be fully tested by Q4
2029.
WSU-OT: other requirements Q1 2029 - Q1 2030 Theseincludethe"wants"fromthe
use case section.
SnooPI: Implementation of SB info Q1 2030 - Q3 2030 If display of SB parameters in
SnooPI is agreed upon.
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 44 of 53
8.3 Key Priorities
At this stage, the timeline (Table 4) states chronologically what must occur for the WSU-OT and
SB Builder to be functional, but it is not grouped into the requirements for each software package. In
Section 7, it is noted that the high level requirements from this TSI need to be refined into detailed
requirements and specifications by the OT working group and developers (D.11), and that will form a
clear list of priorities. The success and functionality of the WSU as a whole is fundamentally tied to
the WSU-OT and the SB Builder.
The top 5 priorities (unordered) for the Use Cases (Section 4.2) and the Spectral Setup (Section
6.5)13, respectively, are listed in short-format below. These lists are not an indication that other
requirements are not needed, but rather to highlight those most urgent to implement. Independent of
these priorities, the work on all deliverables (see Section 7) - which include detailed investigations -
shall be completed, even if a given deliverable is not directly connected to one of these top priorities.
Use Cases
• 3 - An investigator needs an interface to configure and visualize the complex spectral setup.
• 17 - OT needs to estimate the time for each SG.
• 19 - The observatory needs SBs to be prepared for all submitted projects for project assessment
and selection.
• 23 - The P2G needs to manually manipulate several fields in one or more SBs.
• 33 - The commissioning team needs to make standard and non standard SBs to test different
setups.
Spectral Setup:
• 1(a, c) WSU-OT spectral setup design provides functionality to meet the current range of science
cases and must support continuum, spectral line and spectral scan projects.
• 3 (overall) To achieve valid spectral setups the WSU-OT shall provide an interface to capture
science intent, and an interface to visualize and edit the correlator setup.
• 10 (overall) The continuum mode allows the desired frequency resolution to be set and where the
spectral setup is located within a band.
• 11 (overall) The WSU-OT prompts for (and reads) a frequency range for the spectral scan setup.
• 12(a, d, e, g) WSU-OT provides an interface to select spectral lines. The user is required to
13The requirements are layered, in that some after Section 6.5.1 can be more descriptive parts of the higher level
requirements.
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 45 of 53
specify the parameters for the lines of interest. The interface should provide a visualization of
the selected lines of interest.
9 Next Steps
Considerable work is still remaining, some of which, as indicated in Sections 7 and 8, needs to
start as soon as possible. Based on this TSI, and Deliverable D.3, it is imperative that ISOpT endorse
the (other) deliverables such that work on the next steps can begin.
For deliverables (e.g., D.4 through D.18 - Table 2) the standard process will be that the ALMA
OT-WG takes the lead from here and continues as "normal" via SCIREQ tickets where other stake-
holders provide input. This is identified as a high risk process given a situation of under-staffing/staff-
overload and may lead to protracted timescales with only spurts of back and forth discussion. Thus,
efforts need to be made to have better communications and regular input from all stakeholders.
There are also a number of deliverables where the required efforts and functional work are more
extensive than envisaged possible by the current OT-WG alone. These include D.19 through D.25
(Table 3) and will benefit from expert/stakeholder work efforts. In these cases we suggest that the
ALMA OT-WG leads a small group where the relevant stakeholders (e.g., P2G, ATAC, TPGS, PLWG)
temporarily assign one person (or partial efforts thereof) towards the deliverable task so that there is
better coordination and functional person power. There should be draft plans for the workload/efforts
and a timeline as to allow resource planning. Another alternative is that a further TSI(s) is required
for a very specific study and/or deliverable. It is already thought that aggressive TSI timelines would
not be suited to the detailed level that some of the investigations/deliverables may require, although the
OT-SSS in coordination with, and with support of, ISOpT should be able to define which approach to
take.
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 46 of 53
In these Appendices, we describe ATAC and TPGS in further detail.
A ATAC
A.1 Processing Flow
Under the hood, ATAC will operate in three stages to process the 40 GS/s per sideband per
polarization that it receives from each antenna.
1. Thefirststageiscoarsechannelization: ATACwillcreate201FrequencySlices(FS),eachofwhich
is 200MHz wide, to cover the IF=0 to 20GHz range for each (2SB) sideband and polarization,
regardless of the IF bandwidth being used. The frequency grid on which the FS are based is set
by the chosen LO1 frequency. An example of the 201 FS grid overlaid on the Band 2 IF coverage
can be seen in the upper panel of Figure 9.
• While ATAC will ingest and channelize the full (4x) bandwidth from the upstream sig-
nal chain, the bandwidth which is usable for science depends on the WSU milestone (i.e.,
whether we are capable of processing 2x bandwidth [up to 80 FS] or 4x bandwidth [up to
160 FS]) and the input receiver IF bandwidth.
• Once the usable bandwidth is determined, and from the usable bandwidth FS that have
been selected based on the input from the PI in the OT14, the selected FS are passed along
to the next stage. Usable FS are discussed further in Section A.2.
2. The second stage is frequency slice processing: each selected FS is passed to an ALMA Frequency
Slice Processor (AFSP). Each AFSP can process a single FS from all 66 ALMA antennas. In
this stage, the delay and phase tracking, LO offset removal, fine channelization, corner turn, and
correlation are performed, and full polarization visibilities are created.
3. The third stage is SPW creation: after the application of quantization corrections and normaliza-
tion by the autocorrelations, adjacent FS with the same specified spectral resolution are stitched
together in the Correlator Data Processor (CDP) to cover the contiguous bandwidth of each
SPW requested by the user. Up to 80 SPWs can be created in the initial 2x bandwidth deploy-
ment (in the limit of one SPW per selected FS). For each SPW, the CDP does the channel and
time averaging to achieve the required spectral resolution and integration time, applies all online
corrections, and generates the BDFs to transmit to TelCal and Archive.
14From a WSU-OT user perspective SPWs can be identified but would be passed to ATAC as FSs selected.
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 47 of 53
Figure 9: First panel: 201 FS are created in ATAC Stage 1, with each FS being 200MHz wide in
a fixed grid centered on the chosen LO1 frequency. Here, an example of this grid is overlaid on the
Band 2 IF (2-18GHz), and the LO1 has been set to 86.0 GHz. As discussed further in Section A.2,
the dark gray shaded FS indicate the 160 usable FS in the upper and lower sidebands, indicating a total
of 32GHz/polarization. The magenta trace indicates the atmospheric transmission for Band 2 (c.f.,
Figure 1). Second panel: The same Band 2 IF range is displayed with representative approximations
of the anti-aliasing baseband filter (blue trace) and IF = 2 to 18GHz receiver range (orange boxed
frequency ranges and trace). These traces define the usable frequency range for science observations in
Band 2, which ATAC can cover in its entirety with 160 FS in 4× bandwidth WSU.
A.2 Usable FS in the WSU signal chain
Though the Wideband IF Processor (WIFP) can digitize – and ATAC can process – each sideband
withIF=0to20GHz, asshowninFigure9, theactualbandwidththatisusableforscienceisreducedby
an anti-aliasing baseband filter and the selected receiver IF bandwidth. The baseband filter is required
by Sys-Req-271 [AD1] to and IF range from 2GHz to IFmax GHz, where IFmax will be 19.5-20GHz.
The individual receiver output IF bandwidths vary from 4 to 8GHz (current Bands 3, 4, 5, 7, and 8),
4.5 to 10GHz (current Band 6v1), and 4 to 12GHz (current Bands 1, 9, and 10). The WIFP baseband
filter has yet to be finalized, but a representative approximation of the system technical requirement
and some example receiver bandwidths are shown in Figure 9 (bottom, Band 2) and Figure 3 (Bands
6v1 and 6v2). These plots are meant to show conceptually how the different filters and performance
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 48 of 53
interact to constrain the usable bandwidth, though the true shapes of the filters are more complicated.
The combined effect of the filters produces the restriction on which FS can be selected for processing
(by the AFSPs).
Regardless of the number of usable FS in a given observation, the number of FS that can be
processed in the initial 2x bandwidth deployment is up to 80. After the expansion of ATAC and the
WSU signal chain to 4x bandwidth (per Milestone 5), up to 160 FS can be processed for a given
observation.
A.3 Spectral window setups
To create SPWs, ATAC can stitch together any selected FS that are contiguous in frequency and
share a selected spectral resolution, up to 16 GHz in bandwidth, with any integer channel averaging
factor (CAF) required by the user. In practice, a variety of setups can be produced to accommodate
PI-requested SPW bandwidths and frequency resolutions, but not every combination of bandwidth
and CAF is equally desirable. In ATAC Memo #24 [RD3], a suggested, finite list of SPW bandwidth
and CAF options is presented. The ranges of options in SPW bandwidths and CAFs are necessary to
cover the large range in science velocity resolutions required over the large frequency range of ALMA
(35 to 950 GHz); these combinations minimize the data rate required to cover a given set of spectral
lines at a particular velocity resolution and frequency bandwidth.
Limiting the options for SPW bandwidth and CAF options to a finite list is seen to be beneficial
to the ALMA WSU since it limits complexity in the system that does not immediately result in science
value. Further, it limits the scope of commissioning, promotes a degree of self-similarity to WSU
datasets in the Archive, and ensures a consistent bandwidth as a function of spectral resolution (to
the extent that this is possible).
Currently, the ATAC team has proposed 18 options for nominal SPW bandwidths, as follows:
• Narrow SPWs: 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1.0, 1.2, 1.4, 1.6, 1.8, 2.0 GHz per polarization (as currently
offered with the BLC)
• Wide SPWs: 3, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16 GHz per polarization (not currently offered with the BLC)
The actual, exact bandwidths per polarization differ slightly from the nominal values since the
width of a FS is precisely 200.88 MHz (not 200 MHz), as detailed in Memo #24, but this additional
complexity is likely not necessary to show to users.
There are accordingly 23 proposed options for CAFs, as follows (relative to the native 13.5 kHz
channel width):
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 49 of 53
• High resolution CAFs: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, 12, 15, 16, 20, 24, 30, 40, 48, 60, 80, 120, 240
• Low resolution CAFs: “6 MHz" (∼ 400), “12 MHz" (∼ 800), “20 MHz" (∼ 1600)
Bandwidth smearing concerns should prevent users from selecting the “12 MHz" option in Band 1
(configurations 9-10) and the “20 MHz" option in Band 1 (configurations 8-10), Band 2 (configurations
9-10), and Band 3 (configuration 10). Detailed tables showing the channel widths in km/s in each
Band for all high resolution CAFs and low resolution CAFs will appear in Memo #24 [RD3] and are
reproduced here in Figures 10 and 11. Not all CAFs can be used for all 18 SPW bandwidths due to
the maximum channel limit (80k) in a single SPW; Table 7 in Memo #24 provides a further visual
representation of the low CAFs which are excluded for SPW bandwidths larger than 1 GHz as a result
of this limitation.
Figure 10: High resolution options for CAFs (from ATAC Memo #24). Each row corresponds to a
single CAF with the entries in the table indicating the channel width in km/s at the nominal frequency
of each ALMA Band. Highlighted values have additional meanings: yellow cells are integer multiples
of 8 and can be used with high time cadence observations (< 1.024 seconds), as described in Section
A.4, and blue/pink/green cells show the closest match in each Band to 0.1/1.0/10.0 km/s channels.
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 50 of 53
Figure 11: Low resolution options for CAFs (from ATAC Memo #24). Each row corresponds to a
single CAF with the entries in the table indicating the channel width in km/s at the nominal frequency
of each ALMA Band. Highlighted values should be disallowed in the longest baseline configurations due
to bandwidth smearing at those CAFs and observing frequencies, as described in the text.
Finally, the specific SPW properties proposed for system calibration observations, which will also
need to be supported specifically by the OT, are described in ATAC Memo #24 (Table 5 in that Memo
lists the properties as a function of observing intent).
A.4 Frequency resolution, time resolution, and observing modes
In standard observations, ATAC will provide high frequency resolution across the full 16 GHz
(2x) bandwidth, and eventually 32 GHz (4x) bandwidth, with a finest channel width of 13.5 kHz and
time resolution of 1 second. Both higher time cadence observations, and higher spectral resolution
observations (i.e., “zoom" mode), will also be possible at a cost of correlator resources along another
axis. For example, high time cadence (16 ms) observations can be performed with a limitation in
spectral resolution, and zoom mode observations can be performed with a reduction in aggregate
bandwidth. The 11 proposed ATAC CAF options which are compatible with high time resolution
observations are highlighted in Figure 10. The relationship between the finest possible time and
spectral resolutions provided by ATAC is shown in Table 5.
Table 5: Finest time and spectral resolutions provided by ATAC
Correlation Mode Minimum
channel
bandwidth
Minimum integration time
at corresponding channel
bandwidth
Aggregate science band-
width per polarization
(GHz)
2x BW / 4x BW
Finest channel width,
at full bandwidth
13.5 kHz 1024 ms 16 / 32
Highest time cadence,
at full bandwidth
1.08 MHz 16 ms 16 / 32
Continued on next page
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 51 of 53
Table 5: Finest time and spectral resolutions provided by ATAC (Continued)
Correlation Mode Minimum
channel
bandwidth
Minimum integration time
at corresponding channel
bandwidth
Aggregate science band-
width per polarization
(GHz)
2x BW / 4x BW
Zoom = 8 (finest chan-
nel width)
1.6875 kHz 1024 ms 2 / 4
The vast majority of ALMA observations will require ATAC to perform standard interferometry,
in which it will produce Imaging Correlation (IC) visibilities. In addition to IC visibilities, ATAC can
optionally produce other types of visibilities on a per-AFSP basis: zoom windows (ICZoom mode)
or VLBI beams (ICV mode). A single AFSP can handle a single FS on up to 66 antennas, but that
AFSP can run in only one mode at a time; this means that concurrent correlator subarrays using
the same AFSP cannot run both ICZoom and ICV mode observations at the same time. See ATAC
Memo #23 [RD2] for examples of how to run concurrent correlator subarrays (and their corresponding
antenna arrays) in the two ATAC modes. It is important to note that the bandwidth available to a
200 MHz FS is reduced by its zoom factor when running in ICZoom; for instance, with zoom = 8,
the finest channel width is 13.5/8 = 1.6875 kHz and aggregate FS bandwidth is 200/8 = 25 MHz.
Standard interferometric IC visibilities can be produced (identically, in the context of downstream
data processing) in either mode of ATAC operation (ICZoom or ICV).
B TPGS
B.1 TPGS signal chain
Although TPGS is still in the preliminary design phase and some design details in this section are
subject to change (the PDR is planned for January 2026), as ATAC, the TPGS signal chain is designed
with a hierarchical two-stage channelization structure (FFX-type architecture) to efficiently process
wideband input signals with high spectral resolution. The structure comprises coarse channelization
followed by fine channelization, with each stage optimized for flexibility, performance, and spectral
fidelity. Since TPGS is built on commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) computer components, including
high-performance GPUs, the signal chain design offers a degree of flexibility. The full signal chain for
one polarization of a sideband is processed within a single GPU server, although the final overall server
configuration is still under discussion. Figure 12 provides an overview of the TPGS signal chain, which
is described in more detail below.
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 52 of 53
Figure 12: Total Power GPU Spectrometer (TPGS) Signal Chain: Two-Stage Channelization Pipeline
Featuring Oversampled Coarse and Fine Polyphase Filter Banks with Resampling, Filtering, and Spec-
tral Multiplication
Coarse Channelization In the current design phase of TPGS, the most significant difference from
ATAC is the number of frequency slices. The input stream, sampled at 40 GS/s per sideband per
polarization, is first divided into 800 coarse frequency slices using an oversampled polyphase filter
bank (OSPFB) with an oversampling ratio of 800/375. This results in 2.133x larger bandwidth than
the desired usable bandwidth of each frequency slice which will be tailored later by the half-band
filtering. The number of coarse channels of TPGS is different from that of ATAC since the TPGS
signal chain is designed to be utilized with cuFFTDx for better performance, where cuFFTDx has the
limitation of the number of FFT-points.
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl
Wideband Sensitivity Upgrade:
TSI Report: Obsprep
Doc.: ALMA-05.15.00.00-3072-A-REP
Date: September 23, 2025
Page: 53 of 53
This filter stage provides a flat passband of approximately 50.22 MHz per frequency slice, with
a guard region for transition bands to minimize aliasing. The OSPFB also preserves complex-valued
output, enabling subsequent frequency-domain operations without violating the Nyquist constraint.
Following OSPFB, a rational resampler adjusts the output rate to match the fine channelizer’s
required sampling rate to introduce the 13.5kHz frequency resolution of fine channels. This stage
applies a low-pass filter and decimates the signal at 110.592 MHz, carefully aligning the frequency
resolution target.
To further suppress spectral image artifacts, a half-band filter (HBF) is applied, halving the sam-
pling rate while maintaining passband quality and reducing overall computational complexity through
symmetric coefficient reuse.
Zoom mode is implemented by applying low-pass filtering followed by 2×, 4×, or 8× decimation.
To reduce computational load, the zoom filtering is performed before the halfband filtering. This
ordering allows the zoom filter to have a wider transition band, resulting in fewer taps. The decimated
signal is then processed by the same fine channelizer, yielding the same number of channels but with
reduced bandwidth and improved spectral resolution.
Fine Channelization: Each resampled and filtered FS is then processed by a critically sampled
polyphase filter bank (PFB) fine channelizer with 4096 branches, yielding a spectral resolution of 13.5
kHz. Among these, 3720 channels per frequency slice are usable, corresponding to the flat portion
of the 50.22MHz passband that meets the required spectral shape and attenuation performance. In
zoom mode, the effective bandwidth and spectral resolution are further reduced according to the zoom
factor.
Spectral windows creation: After fine channelization, the selected frequency slices are stitched
together to create spectral windows as defined by the user, ensuring 13.5 kHz-continuous alignment
across frequency slices. The frequency slices for TPGS differ from those of ATAC - for example, the
bandwidth is four times smaller — so TPGS will mimic ATAC-like FSs by stitching together multiple
frequency slices. Frequency shifting modules are used for stitching, LO offsetting, and zoom-band
alignment.
Input signals from the digitizer are quantized at 6 bits, and the system maintains a high digital
efficiency of 0.995 or better. For its output products, TPGS uses 32-bit floating-point representation
for both auto-correlation data and the real and imaginary components of cross-correlation. The system
is able to transmit these outputs to the archive at a maximum data rate of 0.595 GB/sec, although
the actual rate depends on the chosen spectral configuration and integration duration.
Printed versions of this document are For Reference Only. The latest released electronic version is located
in the ALMA Electronic Document Management (EDM) system accessible at: http://aedm.alma.cl

